For example: A motor is found to have been wound with 16 wires in hand, all size 17awg ( see the chart below for wire sizes). So in order to re-wind this motor I would have to have 16 separate buckets of #17 wire, unfortunately on any given day I only keep about 4 buckets of #17 wire on hand. When re-winding a motor the important part is not how many wires there are but how many circular mils there are in hand. So I need to find the total circular mils in hand and then re-calculate the winding using a different wire size or a combination of wire sizes.

This example would have 32,768 circular mils in hand (16 * 2,048). The rule of thumb for motor winding is that you can go up or down 2 wire sizes from the base line without significantly affecting the resistance and therefore the amp draw of the wire. If you go up too many sizes, say make it 51 #22awg wires (32,742 circular mils), the math works out but in real life the motor will melt down into an impressive pile of slag. I'm not sure why you can't go down more than 2 sizes since the resistance would drop instead of rise but it's an argument that I'm bowing to experience on at the moment.

 Another rule of thumb is that when you recalculate a motor's circular mils you need to get to within 3% of the original number or in this case +/- 983cm, although the closer the better. I say that closer is better because if you go smaller you are effectively making it a smaller hp motor, while if you go up too much you might not be able to physically fit all of the wire into the motor slots.  

To re-wind this motor I would probably use a combination of 6 #15's and 5 #16's because I generally have a lot more of them on hand. This would yield a total cm of 32,457 which would be small by 311cm. According to the rule this is fine but for me this is a number that is way too far off of the goal because I'm a perfectionist and because I'm worried that the cm reduction might be compounded in future re-winds by other motor shops, ending in a motor with completely skewed specs. This is also a rather easy motor to calculate because the margin of error is huge (983!!). In real life this might be a 600hp motor. A 10 hp motor might have a total cm of 500 and a margin of error close to 15cm making it much harder to figure out.